[Music]
once upon a time your ancestors used to
look at the night sky to determine their
location then we use the Thomas guide
who remember those today it only takes
one magical technology to get driving
directions send your picnic spot to a
lost friend or track how far you've gone
during a workout that technology is
called GPS and you're about to find out
this secret behind it
GPS stands for Global Positioning System
and was actually a military invention
its first name was nav star and the
first satellite was launched in 1978 but
not all the naps to our satellites made
it to orbit so it was still a work in
progress
GPS became fully functional in the u.s.
by 1995 and was first using cars in 1996
the highest quality signals were only
used for military purposes until May
2000 when it became available for all
civilians for free today
GPS is managed by the US Air Force many
modern receivers actually rely on both
GPS and the Russian GLONASS satellites
to make their accuracy perfect anywhere
in the world GPS doesn't need an
internet connection or a phone signal to
function properly but with them it
becomes more effective GPS is literally
everywhere and you can now even purchase
GPS insoles to keep track of your kids
or relatives with Alzheimer's disease
how does it work well to put it simply
GPS is a system that has three basic
parts satellites ground stations and
receivers satellites today are like the
stars and constellations that our
ancestors used to find out their
location they're supposed to be in a
certain place at a certain time and this
is important ground stations use radars
to find out if the satellites really are
where they're supposed to be a receiver
in your phone or in your car is
following signals from the satellites to
determine how far it is from them when
it finds out how far you are from four
or more GPS satellites it can tell
exactly where you are
with an accuracy within feet or even
inches the GPS system has 32 active
satellites orbiting the Earth 24 of them
are core satellites and the rest serve
as emergency replacements when something
happens to the others they need constant
maintenance and sometimes repairs but
even with all that they only last about
10 years GPS works in any weather rain
or shy but there is one important
condition a receiver on earth has to see
at least four satellites to calculate an
accurate location because the GPS uses a
trilateration mechanism don't worry
folks it sounds complicated but I'll
explain it in a second 2d and 3d
trilateration so 2d trilateration is
about calculating its latitude and
longitude position on a map imagine you
went for a run Forrest Gump style left
your home and say Wisconsin and made
your first stop after days of running
you know you're still in the US but
since GPS doesn't exist yet you have no
clue where exactly you are so luckily
you run into a farmer and ask him he
doesn't answer directly but gives you
the first clue
you're 400 miles away from Boise Idaho
well that's not really helpful because
there are hundreds of places that fit
that description so you need more clues
and ask another person they kindly
inform you that you're 780 miles from
Fargo North Dakota if you put this
information you have on paper and draw
two circles you see that the only
intersect at certain points and now you
know you're in one of them still that's
not enough and you find a friendly Girl
Scout who tells you the final clue
you're 410 miles away from Salt Lake
City Utah that's all you need to know as
you add the third circle to your drawing
you see only one intersection point
bingo all this data helped you figure
out you're in Bozeman Montana which is a
nice down
it's all pretty simple right when it
comes to 3d trilateration
it's basically the same but there will
be spears instead of circles on your
drawing 3d position includes your
latitude longitude and altitude
if the radii from the previous example
went in all directions you'd get a
series of 3d spheres so if you know
you're 15 miles away from the satellite
eh then you're at some point inside an
imaginary sphere that has a 15 mile
radius
you're also positive you're 20 miles
away from satellite B when the two
spheres overlap you'll see a circle take
the distance from the third satellite to
build another sphere and you'll get two
points of intersection let's take the
earth itself for the fourth sphere
because you know you're on the ground
and only one of the two possible points
is the one you need the more satellites
you use the more accurate position
you'll get
[Applause]
doing the calculations GPS satellites
send information about their position
and current time to a GPS receiver at
certain intervals the receiver gets the
information in the form of a signal the
GPS receiver analyzes radio signals from
the GPS satellites to figure out two
important things the location of at
least three satellites in space above
you and the distance between you and
those satellites
radio waves travel at the speed of light
the receiver takes the time it took for
the signal to travel from space to the
earth to calculate how far it's travel
and it's not so simple GPS satellites
have atomic clocks that keep the most
precise time but it would be impossible
to install these clocks and every
receiver they cost somewhere between
50,000 and 100,000 dollars so it would
make your phone really really expensive
so receivers have regular quartz clocks
in them that keep updating themselves to
get the most precise time thanks to the
information they receive from satellites
the second complication is that time
moves faster for objects that are far
away from gravity like Einstein's
general theory of relativity satellites
atomic clocks get 38 microseconds ahead
of ground clocks every day if scientists
did nothing about it
GPS locations would be off by 6 miles
more every day using at least four and
not three satellites helps to solve both
of the problems and to determine the
precise locations of objects when you
use just three satellites and three
spheres they'll intersect at some point
even if you got the wrong numbers when
you have four spheres there's no chance
you'll get the wrong measurements one
more thing it's not only important to
know how far the satellite is from the
receiver but where exactly the satellite
is this task isn't that hard
in fact because satellites have
predictable orbits there's also a GPS
Almanac in the receiver that keeps track
of where this or that satellite should
be at any moment the pole of the moon
and the Sun affect the orbits just a bit
but the Department of Defense takes care
of that and sends updated information to
all GPS receivers
along with satellite signals GPS not
only determines the most accurate
location of people and objects but also
sends time signals that are accurate
within ten billionths of a second whoa
you can only get more accurate time from
the atomic clock like the one in GPS
satellites banking systems power grids
and cellular networks all rely on GPS
for operations from synchronized call
handoffs to accurately timestamp
transactions and here's a bonus even
though it's incredibly accurate and
useful sometimes GPS takes people to
unexpected places especially in rural
areas ever get lost me too it can be
hard for it to tell an accurate road
from a mud path and the consequences are
pretty unpleasant for the driver and the
passengers a van driver from Switzerland
for example once found himself on top of
Mount Burgin he was unable to go either
back or forward and so he had to call
for help and a heavy lifting helicopter
eventually saved him he explained to his
rescuers that GPS prompted him to get
off the main road and he couldn't ever
get back even when he wanted to three
ladies in Bellevue Washington didn't
have time to wait for a helicopter but
had believed their sinking mercedes-benz
SUV behind they were driving after
midnight and couldn't see that the road
GPS told them to take was actually a
boat launch that took them directly into
the lake another story took place in
Australia where three Japanese students
were trying to get to North Stradbroke
Island by car their GPS suggested a
route that ignored one detail there was
water and mud separating the island from
the continent that looked okay to them
at low tide they were rescued by a truck
driver
hey technology is great when it works so
do you use GPS services a lot
or do you think you could survive
without them let me know down in the
comments if you learned something new
today then give this video a like and
share it with a friend but hey don't go
driving off the dock just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out all you have to do is pick
the left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life